README.rst, before:

SA-GPR
======

This repository contains a Python code for carrying out Symmetry-Adapted Gaussian Process Regression (SA-GPR) for the machine-learning of tensors. For more information, see:

<https://arxiv.org/abs/1709.06757>

**NOTE: This implementation is intended only to serve as a proof-of-principle of the SA-GPR method. It has not yet been thoroughly tested, and is very slow.**

Requirements
============

The Python packages scipy and sympy are required to run the SA-GPR code.

Installation
============

To install the program, go to the src/ directory and run,

bash install.sh

This will compile the Fortran code for filling power spectra using f2py.

Workflow
========

There are two steps to applying SA-GPR to a physical problem:

1. Calculation of the similarities (kernels) between molecules/bulk systems.
2. Minimization of the prediction error and generation of the weights for prediction.

These two steps are applied by running two different Python scripts: sa-gpr-kernels.py computes the kernels (step 1) and sa-gpr-apply.py carried out the regression (step 2).

Examples
========

The example/ directory contains four sub-directories, with data for the dielectric tensors of water monomers, water dimers, the Zundel cation and boxes of 32 bulk water molecules. Using the water monomer, Zundel cation and bulk water directories, we illustrate three examples of how to use SA-GPR.

**NOTE: As described above, this implementation is very slow, and may be very memory-intensive.**

Before starting, source the environment settings file :code:`env.sh` using :code:`$ source env.sh`.

1. Water Monomer
----------------

Here, we learn the energy of the water monomer. The energy only has a scalar (L=0) component, and learning it is equivalent to the standard SOAP algorithm. We begin by computing the L=0 kernels between the 1000 molecules:

::

  $ cd example/water_monomers
  $ sa-gpr-kernels.py -lval 0 -f coords_1000.in -sg 0.3 -lc 6 -rc 4.0 -cw 1.0 -cen 8

This will create an L=0 kernel file, using the coordinates in coords_1000.in, with Gaussian width 0.3 Angstrom, an angular cutoff of l=6, a radial cutoff of 4 Angstrom, central atom weighting of 1.0, and with centering the environment on oxygen atoms (atomic number 8). The kernel file, :code:`kernel0_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0_n0.txt`, can now be used to perform the regression:

::

  $ sa-gpr-apply.py -r 0 -k kernel0_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0_n0.txt -rdm 200 -ftr 1.0 -t energy_1000.in -lm 1e-8

The regression is performed for a rank-0 tensor, using the kernel file we produced, with a training set containing 200 randomly selected configurations, of which all are used for training. The file :code:`energy_1000.in` contains the energies of the 1000 coordinates, and we use a regularization parameter of 1e-8. By varying the value of the :code:`ftr` variable from 0 to 1, it is possible to create a learning curve which spans a range of training examples from 0 to the full data set.

2. Zundel Cation
----------------

**Learning all components of the hyperpolarizability tensor at once**

Here, we learn the hyperpolarizabilities of the Zundel cation. Because the calculation of the full kernel matrix is quite expensive, we will split this problem up into the calculation of several sub-blocks of the matrix. In :code:`example/water_zundel`, run:

::

  $ mkblocks_nocell.sh coords_1000.in 100

This will create 55 `Block` folders, each of which contains a subset of the coordinates. In each of these folders, run the commands:

::

  $ sa-gpr-kernels.py -lval 1 -f coords.in -sg 0.3 -lc 6 -rc 4.0 -cw 1.0 -cen 8
  $ sa-gpr-kernels.py -lval 3 -f coords.in -sg 0.3 -lc 6 -rc 4.0 -cw 1.0 -cen 8

This will create two kernel files in each folder, one for L=1 and one for L=3 (a symmetric, rank-3 hyperpolarizability tensor can be split up into these two components). Having created these sub-kernels, the next step is to put these back together into a full kernel tensor. To do this, run:

::

  $ rebuild_kernel.py -l 1 -ns 1000 -nb 10 -rc 4.0 -lc 6 -sg 0.3 -cw 1.0
  $ rebuild_kernel.py -l 3 -ns 1000 -nb 10 -rc 4.0 -lc 6 -sg 0.3 -cw 1.0

This will produce two files, :code:`kernel1_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0_n0.txt` and :code:`kernel3_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0_n0.txt`. The Block subfolders can now be deleted. These kernels can be used to perform the regression:

::

  $ sa-gpr-apply.py -r 3 -k kernel1_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0_n0.txt kernel3_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0_n0.txt -rdm 200 -ftr 1.0 -t beta_1000.in -lm 1e-6 1e-3

This command is similar to the one used to perform the regression on the water monomer, except that now we specify a rank-3 tensor, and give as input two kernels (one with L=1 and one with L=3), and two regularization parameters.

**Learning the dipole moment**

The dipole moment is an L=1 tensor, and so the kernel we have already calculated allows us to learn this tensor "for free":

::

  $ sa-gpr-apply.py -r 1 -k kernel1_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0_n0.txt -rdm 200 -ftr 1.0 -t dipole_1000.in -lm 1e-3

Users are encouraged to experiment with the size of the training set and the regularization parameter. In the example on bulk water, we will show how to produce a learning curve.

**Learning the hyperpolarizability components separately**

Instead of learning the L=1 and L=3 components of the hyperpolarizability at the same time, we might want to learn them separately. For this, we first need to split the tensor into its spherical components:

::

  $ cartesian_to_spherical.py -f beta_1000.in

This will produce two files, :code:`beta_1000.in.L1` and :code:`beta_1000.in.L3`, which are the L=1 and L=3 (real) spherical components respectively. To perform regression on the L=1 component, run the command:

::

  $ regression.py -k kernel1_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0.txt -t beta_1000.in.L1 -rdm 200 -nc 5 -ftr 1.0 -lm 1e-6 -o outputL1.out

To perform regression on the L=3 component, run the command:

::

  $ regression.py -k kernel3_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0.txt -t beta_1000.in.L3 -rdm 200 -nc 5 -ftr 1.0 -lm 1e-6 -o outputL3.out 

In these examples, we loop over 5 random selections of the training set. There will be 5 output files printed out, each of which gives the members of the training set for this selection, along with the regression errors and the SA-GPR weights.

3. Bulk water
-------------

Here we consider the case of liquid water as an example of a condensed-phase system. First of all, go to the example directory:

::

  $ cd example/water_bulk/

The files :code:`coords_1000.in` and :code:`cell_1000.in` contain the coordinates and the cell vectors of 1000 structures containing 32 water molecules in periodic boxes of different shapes. In the directory you also find two different kinds of properties associated with these structures: 

- the infinite-frequency static dielectric response tensors (:code:`epsilon_1000.in` ) 
- an effective representation of the molecular polarizabilities (:code:`alpha_1000.in`)

**Learning the Dielectric Tensor**

The dielectric response of the system is represented by a rank-2 tensor which can be decomposed into L=0 and L=2 spherical components. To compute the corresponding tensorial kernels, a procedure similar to that of the Zundel cation is followed. As the system is now much larger, it is better to split the kernel calculation into blocks of even smaller size. For instance, to split it into blocks of dimension 10:

::

  $ mkblocks.sh coords_1000.in cell_1000.in 10

Then, in each of the `Block` folders generated, run the following commands:

::

  $ sa-gpr-kernels.py -lval 0 -f coords.in -per -c cell.in -sg 0.3 -lc 6 -rc 4.0 -cw 1.0 -cen 8
  $ sa-gpr-kernels.py -lval 2 -f coords.in -per -c cell.in -sg 0.3 -lc 6 -rc 4.0 -cw 1.0 -cen 8

The flag :code:`-per` is used here to specify that we are dealing with a periodic system; we also include the cell vector file.

Finally, the kernel is reconstructed and regression is carried out as earlier:

::

  $ rebuild_kernel.py -l 0 -ns 1000 -nb 100 -rc 4.0 -lc 6 -sg 0.3 -cw 1.0
  $ rebuild_kernel.py -l 2 -ns 1000 -nb 100 -rc 4.0 -lc 6 -sg 0.3 -cw 1.0
  $ sa-gpr-apply.py -r 2 -k kernel0_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0_n0.txt kernel2_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0_n0.txt -rdm 200 -ftr 1.0 -t epsilon_1000.in -lm 1e-4 1e-4

Contact
=======

david.wilkins@epfl.ch

andrea.grisafi@epfl.ch

Commit message:

Dressed xyz files read in to get coordinates and properties

README.rst, after:

SA-GPR
======

This repository contains a Python code for carrying out Symmetry-Adapted Gaussian Process Regression (SA-GPR) for the machine-learning of tensors. For more information, see:

<https://arxiv.org/abs/1709.06757>

**NOTE: This implementation is intended only to serve as a proof-of-principle of the SA-GPR method. It has not yet been thoroughly tested, and is very slow.**

Requirements
============

The Python packages scipy and sympy are required to run the SA-GPR code.

Installation
============

To install the program, go to the src/ directory and run,

bash install.sh

This will compile the Fortran code for filling power spectra using f2py.

Workflow
========

There are two steps to applying SA-GPR to a physical problem:

1. Calculation of the similarities (kernels) between molecules/bulk systems.
2. Minimization of the prediction error and generation of the weights for prediction.

These two steps are applied by running two different Python scripts: sa-gpr-kernels.py computes the kernels (step 1) and sa-gpr-apply.py carried out the regression (step 2).

Examples
========

The example/ directory contains four sub-directories, with data for the dielectric tensors of water monomers, water dimers, the Zundel cation and boxes of 32 bulk water molecules. Using the water monomer, Zundel cation and bulk water directories, we illustrate three examples of how to use SA-GPR.

**NOTE: As described above, this implementation is very slow, and may be very memory-intensive.**

Before starting, source the environment settings file :code:`env.sh` using :code:`$ source env.sh`.

1. Water Monomer
----------------

Here, we learn the energy of the water monomer. The energy only has a scalar (L=0) component, and learning it is equivalent to the standard SOAP algorithm. We begin by computing the L=0 kernels between the 1000 molecules:

::

  $ cd example/water_monomers
  $ sa-gpr-kernels.py -lval 0 -f coords_1000.xyz -sg 0.3 -lc 6 -rc 4.0 -cw 1.0 -cen 8

This will create an L=0 kernel file, using the coordinates in coords_1000.in, with Gaussian width 0.3 Angstrom, an angular cutoff of l=6, a radial cutoff of 4 Angstrom, central atom weighting of 1.0, and with centering the environment on oxygen atoms (atomic number 8). The kernel file, :code:`kernel0_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0_n0.txt`, can now be used to perform the regression:

::

  $ sa-gpr-apply.py -r 0 -k kernel0_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0_n0.txt -rdm 200 -ftr 1.0 -f coords_1000.xyz -p "potential" -lm 1e-8

The regression is performed for a rank-0 tensor, using the kernel file we produced, with a training set containing 200 randomly selected configurations, of which all are used for training. The file :code:`coords_1000.xyz` contains the energies of the 1000 coordinates under the heading "potential", and we use a regularization parameter of 1e-8. By varying the value of the :code:`ftr` variable from 0 to 1, it is possible to create a learning curve which spans a range of training examples from 0 to the full data set.

2. Zundel Cation
----------------

**Learning all components of the hyperpolarizability tensor at once**

Here, we learn the hyperpolarizabilities of the Zundel cation. Because the calculation of the full kernel matrix is quite expensive, we will split this problem up into the calculation of several sub-blocks of the matrix. In :code:`example/water_zundel`, run:

::

  $ mkblocks_nocell.sh coords_1000.xyz 100

This will create 55 `Block` folders, each of which contains a subset of the coordinates. In each of these folders, run the commands:

::

  $ sa-gpr-kernels.py -lval 1 -f coords.xyz -sg 0.3 -lc 6 -rc 4.0 -cw 1.0 -cen 8
  $ sa-gpr-kernels.py -lval 3 -f coords.xyz -sg 0.3 -lc 6 -rc 4.0 -cw 1.0 -cen 8

This will create two kernel files in each folder, one for L=1 and one for L=3 (a symmetric, rank-3 hyperpolarizability tensor can be split up into these two components). Having created these sub-kernels, the next step is to put these back together into a full kernel tensor. To do this, run:

::

  $ rebuild_kernel.py -l 1 -ns 1000 -nb 10 -rc 4.0 -lc 6 -sg 0.3 -cw 1.0
  $ rebuild_kernel.py -l 3 -ns 1000 -nb 10 -rc 4.0 -lc 6 -sg 0.3 -cw 1.0

This will produce two files, :code:`kernel1_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0.txt` and :code:`kernel3_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0.txt`. The Block subfolders can now be deleted. These kernels can be used to perform the regression:

::

  $ sa-gpr-apply.py -r 3 -k kernel1_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0.txt kernel3_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0.txt -rdm 200 -ftr 1.0 -t beta_1000.in -lm 1e-6 1e-3

This command is similar to the one used to perform the regression on the water monomer, except that now we specify a rank-3 tensor, and give as input two kernels (one with L=1 and one with L=3), and two regularization parameters.

**Learning the dipole moment**

The dipole moment is an L=1 tensor, and so the kernel we have already calculated allows us to learn this tensor "for free":

::

  $ sa-gpr-apply.py -r 1 -k kernel1_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0.txt -rdm 200 -ftr 1.0 -f coords_1000.xyz -p "mu" -lm 1e-3

Users are encouraged to experiment with the size of the training set and the regularization parameter. In the example on bulk water, we will show how to produce a learning curve.

**Learning the hyperpolarizability components separately**

Instead of learning the L=1 and L=3 components of the hyperpolarizability at the same time, we might want to learn them separately. For this, we first need to split the tensor into its spherical components:

::

  $ cartesian_to_spherical.py -f beta_1000.in

This will produce two files, :code:`beta_1000.in.L1` and :code:`beta_1000.in.L3`, which are the L=1 and L=3 (real) spherical components respectively. To perform regression on the L=1 component, run the command:

::

  $ regression.py -k kernel1_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0.txt -t beta_1000.in.L1 -rdm 200 -nc 5 -ftr 1.0 -lm 1e-6 -o outputL1.out

To perform regression on the L=3 component, run the command:

::

  $ regression.py -k kernel3_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0.txt -t beta_1000.in.L3 -rdm 200 -nc 5 -ftr 1.0 -lm 1e-6 -o outputL3.out 

In these examples, we loop over 5 random selections of the training set. There will be 5 output files printed out, each of which gives the members of the training set for this selection, along with the regression errors and the SA-GPR weights.

3. Bulk water
-------------

Here we consider the case of liquid water as an example of a condensed-phase system. First of all, go to the example directory:

::

  $ cd example/water_bulk/

The file :code:`coords_1000.xyz` contains the coordinates and the cell vectors of 1000 structures of 32 water molecules in periodic boxes of different shapes. This file also includes the infinite-frequency static dielectric response tensors ("epsilon") and an effective representation of the molecular polarizabilities ("alpha").

**Learning the Dielectric Tensor**

The dielectric response of the system is represented by a rank-2 tensor which can be decomposed into L=0 and L=2 spherical components. To compute the corresponding tensorial kernels, a procedure similar to that of the Zundel cation is followed. As the system is now much larger, it is better to split the kernel calculation into blocks of even smaller size. For instance, to split it into blocks of dimension 10:

::

  $ mkblocks_nocell.sh coords_1000.xyz 10

Then, in each of the `Block` folders generated, run the following commands:

::

  $ sa-gpr-kernels.py -lval 0 -f coords.xyz -sg 0.3 -lc 6 -rc 4.0 -cw 1.0 -cen 8
  $ sa-gpr-kernels.py -lval 2 -f coords.xyz -sg 0.3 -lc 6 -rc 4.0 -cw 1.0 -cen 8

Finally, the kernel is reconstructed and regression is carried out as earlier:

::

  $ rebuild_kernel.py -l 0 -ns 1000 -nb 100 -rc 4.0 -lc 6 -sg 0.3 -cw 1.0
  $ rebuild_kernel.py -l 2 -ns 1000 -nb 100 -rc 4.0 -lc 6 -sg 0.3 -cw 1.0
  $ sa-gpr-apply.py -r 2 -k kernel0_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0_n0.txt kernel2_1000_sigma0.3_lcut6_cutoff4.0_cweight1.0_n0.txt -rdm 200 -ftr 1.0 -f coords_1000.xyz -per "epsilon" -lm 1e-4 1e-4

Contact
=======

david.wilkins@epfl.ch

andrea.grisafi@epfl.ch
